[docs] Add pods not updating to common problems (#3964)
elastic/cloud-on-k8s: docs/operating-eck/troubleshooting/common-problems.asciidoc

----

Failure to do so can cause data loss.

[id="{p}-{page_id}-pod-updates"]
== Pods are not replaced after a configuration update

The update of an existing Elasticsearch cluster configuration can fail because the operator is unable to apply the changes required while replacing the pods of a given Elasticsearch cluster.

> This can be identified by the `AGE` of the pod being older than the configuration update, or the `STATUS` of the pods:

Reviewer: After discussion with @barkbay, it seems more appropriate to adjust the text as follows:

> A key indicator is when the Phase of the Elasticsearch resource is in `ApplyingChanges` state for too long:
> $ kubectl get es 
> NAME                   HEALTH   NODES   VERSION   PHASE             AGE
> elasticsearch-sample   yellow   2       7.9.2     ApplyingChanges   36m

> This can be identified by the `AGE` of the pod being older than the configuration update, or the `STATUS` of the pods:

Author: 👍 Looks good to me.

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get pods

NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
quickstart-es-default-0   1/1     Running   0          15m
quickstart-es-default-1   1/1     Running   0          15m
quickstart-es-default-2   1/1     Running   0          15m
----

Possible causes include:

* The Elasticsearch cluster is not healthy.
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl get elasticsearch

NAME                                                              HEALTH   NODES   VERSION   PHASE   AGE
elasticsearch.elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/elasticsearch-sample   yellow   1       7.9.2     Ready   3m50s
----
+
In this case, you have to link:{ref}/cluster-allocation-explain.html[check] and fix your shard allocations.  The link:{ref}/cluster-health.html[cluster health], link:{ref}/cat-shards.html[cat shards], and link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/1.3/k8s-deploy-elasticsearch.html#k8s_monitor_cluster_health_and_creation_progress[get Elasticsearch] APIs can assist in tracking the shard recover process.

* There are not enough resources in the Kubernetes cluster.
+
The scheduling fails with the following message:
+
[source,sh]
----

> kubectl get events --sort-by='{.lastTimestamp}' | tail

Reviewer: As an alternative, to get more specific information about a given pod, you can use the following command: 
$ kubectl get pod elasticsearch-sample-es-default-2  -o go-template="{{.status}}"
map[conditions:[map[lastProbeTime:<nil> lastTransitionTime:2020-12-07T09:31:06Z message:0/3 nodes are available: 3 Insufficient cpu. reason:Unschedulable status:False type:PodScheduled]] phase:Pending qosClass:Guaranteed]

> kubectl get events --sort-by='{.lastTimestamp}' | tail

Author: 👍 Looks good to me.  Already included below.

LAST SEEN   TYPE      REASON             OBJECT                        MESSAGE
10s         Warning   FailedScheduling   pod/quickstart-es-default-2   0/3 nodes are available: 3 Insufficient memory.
----
+

> The operator is not able to restart some nodes:

Reviewer: We can create a separate section for that part.

+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl -n elastic-system logs statefulset.apps/elastic-operator | tail

{"log.level":"info","@timestamp":"2020-11-19T17:34:48.769Z","log.logger":"driver","message":"Cannot restart some nodes for upgrade at this time","service.version":"1.3.0+6db1914b","service.type":"eck","ecs.version":"1.4.0","namespace":"default","es_name":"quickstart","failed_predicates":{"do_not_restart_healthy_node_if_MaxUnavailable_reached":["quickstart-es-default-1","quickstart-es-default-0"]}}
----
+
A pod is stuck in a `Pending` status:
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl get pods

NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
quickstart-es-default-0   1/1     Running   0          146m
quickstart-es-default-1   1/1     Running   0          146m
quickstart-es-default-2   0/1     Pending   0          134m
----
+

> In this case, you have to add more K8s nodes, or free up resources. In the worst case, delete the pod and ECK operator will recreate it.

Reviewer: Delete the sentence "In the worst case, delete the pod and ECK operator will recreate it." as it's confusing and doesn't solve the problem.

> In this case, you have to add more K8s nodes, or free up resources. In the worst case, delete the pod and ECK operator will recreate it.

Author: 👍 LGTM.  Fix already applied.

----

Failure to do so can cause data loss.

[id="{p}-{page_id}-pod-updates"]
== Pods are not replaced after a configuration update

The update of an existing Elasticsearch cluster configuration can fail because the operator is unable to apply the changes required while replacing the pods of a given Elasticsearch cluster.

This can be identified by the `AGE` of the pod being older than the configuration update, or the `STATUS` of the pods:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get pods

NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
quickstart-es-default-0   1/1     Running   0          15m
quickstart-es-default-1   1/1     Running   0          15m
quickstart-es-default-2   1/1     Running   0          15m
----

Possible causes include:

* The Elasticsearch cluster is not healthy.
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl get elasticsearch

NAME         HEALTH   NODES   VERSION   PHASE   AGE

> TODO: Finish example

Author: - [ ] Need output example of a yellow cluster

Reviewer 2: Hi,

If it helps a cluster with unassigned shards would look like this:

```
NAME                                                              HEALTH   NODES   VERSION   PHASE   AGE
elasticsearch.elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/elasticsearch-sample   yellow   1       7.9.2     Ready   3m50s
```

Not sure if we should use `{version}` as it might break formatting.

Reviewer: I added the example provided by @barkbay.
@a03nikki is this what you expected?

Author: @alaudazzi : Yes, this is what I was expecting for the TODO.

----
+

> In this case, you have to check and fix your shard allocations.
> For more information, see link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/7.10/cluster-health.html[Cluster health API]
> and link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/1.3/k8s-deploy-elasticsearch.html#k8s_monitor_cluster_health_and_creation_progress[Monitor cluster health and creation progress].

Author: ```suggestion
In this case, you have to link:{ref}/cluster-allocation-explain.html[check] and fix your shard allocations.  The link:{ref}/cluster-health.html[cluster health], link:{ref}/cat-shards.html[cat shards], and
and link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/1.3/k8s-deploy-elasticsearch.html#k8s_monitor_cluster_health_and_creation_progress[Monitor cluster health and creation progress] APIs can assist in tracking the shard recover process.
```

Author: - [ ] Fix reference to ECK documentation

Author: The page id is `{p}-deploy-elasticsearch` for <https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/1.3/k8s-deploy-elasticsearch.html>, but not sure how to handle the `#k8s_monitor_cluster_health_and_creation_progress` portion of the URL.

----

Failure to do so can cause data loss.

[id="{p}-{page_id}-pod-updates"]

> == Pods are not replaced after configuration update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Pods are not replaced after a configuration update
```

> When updating an existing Elasticsearch cluster configuration, the update can fail while being be applied.  This happens when the operator is unable to apply the changes required by replacing the pods of a given the Elasticsearch cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The update of an existing Elasticsearch cluster configuration can fail because the operator is unable to apply the changes required while replacing the pods of a given Elasticsearch cluster.
```

> This can be identified by the `AGE` of the pod being older than the configuration update or the `STATUS` of the pods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be identified by the `AGE` of the pod being older than the configuration update, or the `STATUS` of the pods:
```

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get pods

NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
quickstart-es-default-0   1/1     Running   0          15m
quickstart-es-default-1   1/1     Running   0          15m
quickstart-es-default-2   1/1     Running   0          15m
----

> The causes include

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The causes include:
```

> - Elasticsearch cluster is not healthy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Elasticsearch cluster is not healthy.
```

> The health of the cluster may look like

Reviewer: Maybe this line is not needed?

Author: Yes, it is redundant with the section header.  Do we need some sort of transition from bullet point to the command like we have for the K8s resource section?

Reviewer: Not always. In this case it's quite intuitive the logical sequence from text to code.

Author: ```suggestion
```

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get elasticsearch

NAME         HEALTH   NODES   VERSION   PHASE   AGE
TODO: Finish example
----

TODO:
Action: Check and fix your shard allocations.
(more API details can be added here)

> For more information, see https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/7.10/cluster-health.html
> and https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/1.3/k8s-deploy-elasticsearch.html#k8s_monitor_cluster_health_and_creation_progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/7.10/cluster-health.html[Cluster health API]
and link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/1.3/k8s-deploy-elasticsearch.html#k8s_monitor_cluster_health_and_creation_progress[Monitor cluster health and creation progress].
```

- Not enough resources in the Kubernetes cluster

> The scheduling may fail with a message such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scheduling might fail with the following message:
```

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get events --sort-by='{.lastTimestamp}' | tail

LAST SEEN   TYPE      REASON             OBJECT                        MESSAGE
10s         Warning   FailedScheduling   pod/quickstart-es-default-2   0/3 nodes are available: 3 Insufficient memory.
----

> Or a pod is stuck in `STATUS` of `Pending` with an operator log of unable to `restart some nodes`

Reviewer: We might reword this sentence. It's a bit unclear...

Author: I took a stab at a rewording it, does this help?

> Or a pod is stuck in `STATUS` of `Pending` with an operator log of unable to `restart some nodes`
> 
> [source,sh]
> ----
> kubectl get pods
> 
> NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
> quickstart-es-default-0   1/1     Running   0          146m
> quickstart-es-default-1   1/1     Running   0          146m
> quickstart-es-default-2   0/1     Pending   0          134m
> 
> 
> kubectl -n elastic-system logs statefulset.apps/elastic-operator | tail
> 
> {"log.level":"info","@timestamp":"2020-11-19T17:34:48.769Z","log.logger":"driver","message":"Cannot restart some nodes for upgrade at this time","service.version":"1.3.0+6db1914b","service.type":"eck","ecs.version":"1.4.0","namespace":"default","es_name":"quickstart","failed_predicates":{"do_not_restart_healthy_node_if_MaxUnavailable_reached":["quickstart-es-default-1","quickstart-es-default-0"]}}
> ----

Author: ```suggestion
The operator may log it is unable to `restart some nodes`:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl -n elastic-system logs statefulset.apps/elastic-operator | tail

{"log.level":"info","@timestamp":"2020-11-19T17:34:48.769Z","log.logger":"driver","message":"Cannot restart some nodes for upgrade at this time","service.version":"1.3.0+6db1914b","service.type":"eck","ecs.version":"1.4.0","namespace":"default","es_name":"quickstart","failed_predicates":{"do_not_restart_healthy_node_if_MaxUnavailable_reached":["quickstart-es-default-1","quickstart-es-default-0"]}}
----

A pod is stuck in `STATUS` of `Pending`:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get pods

NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
quickstart-es-default-0   1/1     Running   0          146m
quickstart-es-default-1   1/1     Running   0          146m
quickstart-es-default-2   0/1     Pending   0          134m
----
```

Author: I did not figure out is _where_ the `kubectl` command would tell me "why?" the pod is stuck in pending.  As I purposefully set-up the failure, I knew the lack of compute resources was the cause but was not able to find message to tell me this is the case.  I'm sure the info is somewhere, I just don't know where to look or had the time to look into it.

Reviewer: @sebgl asking for your help here.

Reviewer 3: > I did not figure out is where the kubectl command would tell me "why?" the pod is stuck in pending

What you're looking for are `events` attached to that Pod. They live in a different structure: the `events` (`kubectl get events`), not the Pod.

Fortunately, there's an easy shortcut to grab all events attached to a particular Pod:

```
> kubectl describe pod <pod-name>

(... a lot of stuff here including the pod spec.... but at the very end of the output you'll see the events:)

Events:
  Type     Reason             Age                From                Message
  ----     ------             ----               ----                -------
  Normal   NotTriggerScaleUp  91s                cluster-autoscaler  pod didn't trigger scale-up (it wouldn't fit if a new node is added):
  Warning  FailedScheduling   14s (x4 over 93s)  default-scheduler   0/3 nodes are available: 3 Insufficient memory.
```

----

Failure to do so can cause data loss.

[id="{p}-{page_id}-pod-updates"]
== Pods are not replaced after a configuration update

> The update of an existing Elasticsearch cluster configuration can fail because the operator is unable to apply the changes required while replacing the pods of a given Elasticsearch cluster.
> A key indicator is when the Phase of the Elasticsearch resource is in `ApplyingChanges` state for too long:

Author: ```suggestion
The update of an existing Elasticsearch cluster configuration can fail because the operator is unable to apply the changes required while replacing the pods of a given Elasticsearch cluster.

A key indicator is when the Phase of the Elasticsearch resource is in `ApplyingChanges` state for too long:
```

[source,sh]
----

> kubectl get es

Author: What is the correct format to display both output and command at the same time?  We have a few different methods in the [Troubleshooting](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/current/k8s-troubleshooting.html) doc section.  Right now we have two different formats for this new section.

Existing formats
- Single command (no leading $, output in separate block) in [common](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/current/k8s-common-problems.html) and [methods](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/current/k8s-troubleshooting-methods.html) 
    ```bash
    kubectl patch sts elastic-operator....
    ```
- Command with output (with leading $) in [common](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/current/k8s-common-problems.html)
    ```bash
    $ kubectl get secret quickstart-es-elastic-user -o yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    ...
    ```
- Command with output (without the leading $ and newline between input and output) in [methods](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/current/k8s-troubleshooting-methods.html)
    ```
    kubectl get pods
    
    NAME                                 READY     STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
    ...
    ```

Reviewer: Let's remove the leading $.

NAME                  HEALTH   NODES    VERSION   PHASE            AGE          
elasticsearch-sample  yellow   2        7.9.2     ApplyingChanges  36m
----

Possible causes include:

* The Elasticsearch cluster is not healthy
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl get elasticsearch

NAME                                                              HEALTH   NODES   VERSION   PHASE   AGE
elasticsearch.elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/elasticsearch-sample   yellow   1       7.9.2     Ready   3m50s
----
+

> In this case, you have to link:{ref}/cluster-allocation-explain.html[check] and fix your shard allocations.  The link:{ref}/cluster-health.html[cluster health], link:{ref}/cat-shards.html[cat shards], and link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/1.3/k8s-deploy-elasticsearch.html#k8s_monitor_cluster_health_and_creation_progress[get Elasticsearch] APIs can assist in tracking the shard recover process.

Author: Updated the link to use an anchor within this doc so it continues to follow the same version of the docs as there are more releases.
```suggestion
In this case, you have to link:{ref}/cluster-allocation-explain.html[check] and fix your shard allocations.  The link:{ref}/cluster-health.html[cluster health], link:{ref}/cat-shards.html[cat shards], and <<{p}-elasticsearch-monitor-cluster-health,get Elasticsearch>> APIs can assist in tracking the shard recover process.
```
